Sols 4120-4122: Mars Throws Us a Curveball! 
 As we previously documented, the first “Mineral King” drill hole did not quite reach the target depth that we typically desire to ensure that we have enough sample in the drill stem to deliver to our internal CheMin and SAM instruments. While we did get a successful X-ray diffraction CheMin analysis, we did not quite have enough sample left for SAM to be able to complete their Evolved Gas Analysis (EGA). The rover engineers selected a new potential drill spot on the same block, and this morning we got the results of the APXS, MAHLI and preload test (to check for stability and drillability) on that spot. While the chemistry and imaging indicated that it was a good candidate the preload test did not pass. The selected target was just a little too close to the rover. As the APXS strategic planner today, I reported the results of the APXS chemical analysis to the team; we were looking for the “Mineral King2” area to have a similar composition to the first drill target. We found out about the failure of the preload test as we were ready to deliver our preliminary plan, but we are all used to reacting to the surprises that Mars occasionally sends our way! The science, engineering and uplink teams did an excellent job responding to the sudden change of plans and we managed to come up with a homerun, version 2 of our plan to accommodate the late-breaking news, taking advantage of the extra power and time available to us, given that we were not proceeding with drilling!