Sols 4079-4081: Shaking Out the Dust 
 Curiosity's contact science on "Sierra Columbine" and drive on sol 4078 completed successfully. On sol 4079, Curiosity will perform two dust removals, MAHLI microscopic imaging, and APXS composition measurements on nodular bedrock targets "Simpson Meadow" and "Lake Sabrina." The first target honors an expansive meadow, known for its dangerous trail crossing of the often raging Middle Fork Kings River in Kings Canyon National Park. The second is named for a spectacular, sheer-walled reservoir in the upper reaches of Bishop Creek Canyon, favorite of hikers, rock climbers, and trout. All targets in this area of Mount Sharp are named after the Bishop geological quadrangle in the High Sierra and Owens Valley of Calfornia, familiar to students of late Caltech geology Professor Robert Sharp. Mastcam will image the "Orinoco" butte behind Curiosity, as well as targets "Paradise Peak," "Big Arroyo," and some nearby troughs between the rocks. Mastcam and the ChemCam laser will also target "Minaret Vista," named for an iconic viewpoint near Mammoth Mountain which overlooks the San Joaquin River canyon in Devil’s Postpile National Monument. The ChemCam RMI telescope will map stratigraphy on the Kukenan butte. Atmospheric observations on this sol include a dust devil survey and an APXS measurement of argon and other atmospheric constituents. Curiosity starts Sol 4080 by completing science documentation of this stop with a ChemCam LIBS + Mastcam observation of "Pinchot Pass," a dark nodule named for an outstanding 12,000 ft alpine pass on the John Muir Trail. This is followed by a ChemCam passive sky and 10x1 RMI panorama of upper Gediz Vallis Ridge. Curiosity then will start driving, while simultaneously commanding the Mastcam left filter wheel to move. After the drive ends, Curiosity will perform its usual post drive panoramic imaging, and Mastcam will look for filter wheel motion with a left camera image. On the third sol of the plan (4081), ChemCam will perform a set of AEGIS observations at the new stop, followed by Navcam and Mastcam atmospheric dust opacity measurements, Navcam cloud movies, and a Navcam dust devil movie. On Monday, the Curiosity team will do contact science at the new location, then drive on. The attached image shows a Navcam image of our road ahead.